README.md, before:

# VLM Project to generate patient report for diabetic retinopathy 

## Objective
- To diagnose diabetic retinopathy from fundus images and generate a report using VLM's for patients that shows the severity of disease and current eye health. 

## Output classes and abnormalities
1) Optic disc 
2) Hard exudates
3) Soft exudates
4) Microaneurysms 
5) Haemorrhages
6) Background (Weight = 0.03, Extremely downweighted)


## Models tried
1) Segmentation (UNet++) + Gemma

## Proposed architecture
### Segmentation + Gemma
#### Current architecture
- Using UNet++ model with timm-efficientnet-b3 encoder and imagenet weights
for segmenting fundus images into optic disc and multiple abnormalities.
- Hyperparameters:
  1) No of epochs: 25
  2) Learning rate: 3e-4
  3) Batch size: 3
  4) Image size: 512
  5) No. of output classes: 6
- Loss: 0.5 * dice_loss + 0.5 * ce_loss
- Optimizer: Adam optimizer with weight decay 1e-4

## Metrics
- Train IoU ~ 0.40–0.44
- Training loss (0.5 * dice_loss + 0.5 * ce_loss): 0.37
- Validation total loss (0.5 * dice_loss + 0.5 * ce_loss): 0.36
- Training loss curve:
![Training loss curve](training_loss_curve.png)

## Conclusion
### Stage-1 (Application of segmentation model to detect and mark abnormalities)
![Overlay Image](overlay.png)

### Stage-2 (Using VLM model to generate summary report of fundus abnormalities)

Commit message:

docs(readme): clarify Stage-2 uses segmented image from Stage-1 model
- Specify that Qwen2-VL-2B-Instruct operates on the segmented retinal image
- Clarify pipeline flow: Stage-1 segmentation → Stage-2 VLM report generation
- Refine wording around DR severity as model-estimated

README.md, after:

# VLM Project to generate patient report for diabetic retinopathy 

## Objective
- To diagnose diabetic retinopathy from fundus images and generate a report using VLM's for patients that shows the severity of disease and current eye health. 

## Output classes and abnormalities
1) Optic disc 
2) Hard exudates
3) Soft exudates
4) Microaneurysms 
5) Haemorrhages
6) Background (Weight = 0.03, Extremely downweighted)


## Models tried
1) Segmentation (UNet++) + Gemma

## Proposed architecture
### Segmentation + Qwen
#### Current architecture
- Using UNet++ model with timm-efficientnet-b3 encoder and imagenet weights
for segmenting fundus images into optic disc and multiple abnormalities.
- Hyperparameters:
  1) No of epochs: 25
  2) Learning rate: 3e-4
  3) Batch size: 3
  4) Image size: 512
  5) No. of output classes: 6
- Loss: 0.5 * dice_loss + 0.5 * ce_loss
- Optimizer: Adam optimizer with weight decay 1e-4

## Metrics
- Train IoU ~ 0.40–0.44
- Training loss (0.5 * dice_loss + 0.5 * ce_loss): 0.37
- Validation total loss (0.5 * dice_loss + 0.5 * ce_loss): 0.36
- Training loss curve:
![Training loss curve](training_loss_curve.png)

## Conclusion
### Stage-1 (Application of segmentation model to detect and mark abnormalities)
![Overlay Image](overlay.png)

### Stage-2 (Using VLM model to generate summary report of fundus abnormalities)
Uses Qwen2-VL-2B-Instruct to generate a structured, patient-facing summary 
based on the segmented retinal image output from the Stage-1 segmentation model. 

The model describes detected fundus abnormalities and provides a model-estimated 
diabetic retinopathy severity level.
